README.md, before:

# Q_sensor Review

## Introduction

This document presents a review on the accuracy of the following [ESP32-C6 multi sensor (alias Q_sensor)](https://www.tindie.com/products/adz1122/esp32-c6-multi-sensor-co2-voc-imu/) measurements:
- Temperatures given by the AHT20, BMP280 and SDC40 sensors
- Humidities given by the AHT20 and SDC40 sensors
- CO2 given by the SDC40 sensor

It enlights some problems with the SDC40 and other sensors of the Q_sensor and also focused on adding several DS18B20 temperature probes to the Q_sensor. The firmware used in these devices was directly based on [xyzroe's Zigbee code](https://github.com/xyzroe/Q_sensor).


## Material and methodology

### ESP32-C6 multi sensors

5 Q_sensors were ordered:
- 2 Q_sensors v2.1 on [Tindie](https://www.tindie.com/products/adz1122/esp32-c6-multi-sensor-co2-voc-imu/) with a SDC40 or SDC41 module (**no laser marking on the sensor!**, see [datasheet][https://sensirion.com/media/documents/48C4B7FB/64C134E7/Sensirion_SCD4x_Datasheet.pdf] page 24) directly soldered on the Q_sensor PCB
- 3 Q_sensors v2.2 on [Aliexpress](https://fr.aliexpress.com/item/1005007922381128.html), each, with a laser marked SDC40 module.

**Please note that both Q_sensors v2.1 had some ground connections issues with the PCB that were corrected and one Q_sensor v2.2 had power supply issues on the PCB (brownout detector triggered) and was unusable!**

All Q_sensors wered modified to add a Onewire bus on GPIO 9 (BOOT) (see picture below) with a pull-up 4.7k resistor below the PCB in order to connect up to 5 DS18B20, usually with 5m cable length (max 4x5m & 1x1m), by using a JST-8PIN connector on Header H6. A second onewire bus GPIO 1 on one of the Q_sensor v2.2 was also added in order to increase the number of DS18B20 to max 8 DS18B50 (usually 5-6) with 5m cables because there were too much reading errors with only one bus connecting 5 DS18B20 probes. 

![Q_sensor OneWire](./images/Q_sensor_OneWire.png)

Please note that the Q_sensor also contains a light sensor (BH1750 lux measurement), a radar for presence detection (BS5820), a VOC sensor (AGS10) and an IMU (QMI8658C) that were not analyzed for this review.

### Other devices

In order to compare the measurements given by the Q_sensors, 3 other devices were used:
1. A [Xiaomi LYWSD03MMC with a custom zigbee firmware](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/devices/LYWSD03MMC-z.html#xiaomi-lywsd03mmc-z) measuring room temperature and humidy. 
2. A [TS0601 air quality sensor](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/devices/LYWSD03MMC-z.html#xiaomi-lywsd03mmc-z) measuring room temperature, humidity and CO2. This sensor alos gives VOC and Formaldehyd measurements which were not used.
3. A _DIY_ (Do-It-Yoursel) ESP32-C6, calle *R_sensor*, with a BME280 module for room temperature and humidity and a MH-Z19B for CO2. A HC SR501 PIR detector (for presence detection) and a BH1750 light sensor were also connected to this device but were not used. 


### Experimental measurement campaign

In total, 6 Zigbee devices were used in a 14-day measurement campaign, including 3 Q_sensors without their case and the 3 devices described in the previous section. The devices with their name/Zigbee address is given below:
1. `0x404ccafffe571d50`: Q_sensor v2.1 without DS18B20 probe
2. `0x404ccafffe56dcbc`: Q_sensor v2.2 with 1 DS18B20 probe
3. `0x404ccafffe56dd00`: Q_sensor v2.2 with 2 onewire buses each connecting 4 DS18B20 probes (total 8 probes)
4. `0xa4c138c8b4cad0f7`: Xiaomi LYWSD03MMC 
5. `0xa4c138901f2c788c`: TS0601 air quality sensor
6. `0x588c81fffe37b37c`: R_sensor 

As the following image shows, all devices were placed on a desk in a office room where a person might occasionally be present next to the devices.

![Experimant pictures](./images/Experiment.jpg)

All devices were connected to a USB Zigbee coordinator dongle in the same room using [Zigbee2MQTT](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/) with a reporting of maximum 10min for each Q_sensor and R_sensor measurement on a installed mqtt server [`mosquitto`](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/guide/usage/integrations/home_assistant.html), max 1h for the LYWSD03MMC device and unknown for the TS0601 air quality sensor (but probably a few seconds as specified in the `Notes` of this [link](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/devices/TS0601_air_quality_sensor.html#tuya-ts0601_air_quality_sensor)).

In order to easily record measurements sent by different devices in a time series [influx2 database](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v2/), [Home-Assistant](http://home-assistant.io/) was configured to use the same mqtt server as Zigbee2MQTT and  Zigbee2MQTT was also configured [for Home-Assistant](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/guide/usage/integrations/home_assistant.html). In parallel, Home-Assistant was linked to [an external influx2 database](https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/influxdb/).

Finaly, to easily analyse the precision of the measurements in the influx2 database, a [grafana](https://grafana.com) dashboard using the influx2 database as source was created. 


## Results and discussion

### Temperature

During the campaign, the temperature variation in the room for all sensors (i.e. max temp minus min temp) was  6° (+/-1°). As shown in the figures below, all sensors give the same evolution of the room temperature during the experiment. However, the temperature values ​​are completely different and this difference will be analyzed further. 

![Q_sensor temperatures](./images/Q_sensor_Temperatures.png)

![All DS18B20 probes temperatures](./images/DS18B20%20probes.png)

![Other sensor temperature](./images/Other%20sensors%20Temperatures.png)

For the same temperature sensor, the range is around 1°C (75%) for the AHT20, the SDC40 and the DS18B20 and +/-1.75°C (75%) for the BMP280. Most temperature values ​​within the same sensor family are generally very close with the exception of the BMP280 as shown in the next figures. 

![AHT20 Temperature Range](./images/AHT20%20Temperature%20Range.png)

![SDC40 Temperature Range](./images/SDC40%20Temperature%20Range.png)

![BMP280 Temperature Range](./images/BMP280%20Temperature%20Range.png)

![DS18B20 Temperature Range](./images/DS18B20%20Temperature%20Range.png)

As shown in the next figure, the range of the 3 other temperature sensors is around 1.2°C (75%) which is in accordance with the accuracy of these devices. 

![Other sensors Temperature Range](./images/Other%20sensors%20Temperature%20Range.png)


Since the temperature of other sensors are closed enough, the mean temperature of these sensors will be used as the real room temperature (ground truth). Moreover, in order to decrease the number of sensors to analyse, the mean temperature of each sensor family will be used even if, for the BMP280 one, it is less accurate.



**Nevertheless, an important bias is present for all temperature sensors of the Q_sensor, more precisily, when you compare to other sensor, the AHT20 has a bias of ~5°C, the SDC40 of ~4°C and the BMP280 of 9°C!**. 





The source of this biased temperature measurement might be:
- Bad sensor batch/uncalibrated sensors
- Overheating of the sensor when soldered on the PCB

Since the evolution of the temperature seems correct, a constant temperature offset can be removed. 


### Humidity 

The humidity variation in the room for all sensors was around 17%+/-2%. As before, a bias of ~8% (+/3%) of both humidity sensors in the Q_sensors compared to other sensor is present. 

Since the relative humidity depends on the room temperature, this bias is probably linked to the temperature one. 


### CO2




### Other measurements




## Conlusion

Commit message:

Update 2 files
- /images/Mean Temperatures.png
- /README.md

README.md, after:

# Q_sensor Review

## Introduction

This document presents a review on the accuracy of the following [ESP32-C6 multi sensor (alias Q_sensor)](https://www.tindie.com/products/adz1122/esp32-c6-multi-sensor-co2-voc-imu/) measurements:
- Temperatures given by the AHT20, BMP280 and SDC40 sensors
- Humidities given by the AHT20 and SDC40 sensors
- CO2 given by the SDC40 sensor

It enlights some problems with the SDC40 and other sensors of the Q_sensor and also focused on adding several DS18B20 temperature probes to the Q_sensor. The firmware used in these devices was directly based on [xyzroe's Zigbee code](https://github.com/xyzroe/Q_sensor).


## Material and methodology

### ESP32-C6 multi sensors

5 Q_sensors were ordered:
- 2 Q_sensors v2.1 on [Tindie](https://www.tindie.com/products/adz1122/esp32-c6-multi-sensor-co2-voc-imu/) with a SDC40 or SDC41 module (**no laser marking on the sensor!**, see [datasheet][https://sensirion.com/media/documents/48C4B7FB/64C134E7/Sensirion_SCD4x_Datasheet.pdf] page 24) directly soldered on the Q_sensor PCB
- 3 Q_sensors v2.2 on [Aliexpress](https://fr.aliexpress.com/item/1005007922381128.html), each, with a laser marked SDC40 module.

**Please note that both Q_sensors v2.1 had some ground connections issues with the PCB that were corrected and one Q_sensor v2.2 had power supply issues on the PCB (brownout detector triggered) and was unusable!**

All Q_sensors wered modified to add a Onewire bus on GPIO 9 (BOOT) (see picture below) with a pull-up 4.7k resistor below the PCB in order to connect up to 5 DS18B20, usually with 5m cable length (max 4x5m & 1x1m), by using a JST-8PIN connector on Header H6. A second onewire bus GPIO 1 on one of the Q_sensor v2.2 was also added in order to increase the number of DS18B20 to max 8 DS18B50 (usually 5-6) with 5m cables because there were too much reading errors with only one bus connecting 5 DS18B20 probes. 

![Q_sensor OneWire](./images/Q_sensor_OneWire.png)

Please note that the Q_sensor also contains a light sensor (BH1750 lux measurement), a radar for presence detection (BS5820), a VOC sensor (AGS10) and an IMU (QMI8658C) that were not analyzed for this review.

### Other devices

In order to compare the measurements given by the Q_sensors, 3 other devices were used:
1. A [Xiaomi LYWSD03MMC with a custom zigbee firmware](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/devices/LYWSD03MMC-z.html#xiaomi-lywsd03mmc-z) measuring room temperature and humidy. 
2. A [TS0601 air quality sensor](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/devices/LYWSD03MMC-z.html#xiaomi-lywsd03mmc-z) measuring room temperature, humidity and CO2. This sensor alos gives VOC and Formaldehyd measurements which were not used.
3. A _DIY_ (Do-It-Yoursel) ESP32-C6, calle *R_sensor*, with a BME280 module for room temperature and humidity and a MH-Z19B for CO2. A HC SR501 PIR detector (for presence detection) and a BH1750 light sensor were also connected to this device but were not used. 


### Experimental measurement campaign

In total, 6 Zigbee devices were used in a 14-day measurement campaign, including 3 Q_sensors without their case and the 3 devices described in the previous section. The devices with their name/Zigbee address is given below:
1. `0x404ccafffe571d50`: Q_sensor v2.1 without DS18B20 probe
2. `0x404ccafffe56dcbc`: Q_sensor v2.2 with 1 DS18B20 probe
3. `0x404ccafffe56dd00`: Q_sensor v2.2 with 2 onewire buses each connecting 4 DS18B20 probes (total 8 probes)
4. `0xa4c138c8b4cad0f7`: Xiaomi LYWSD03MMC 
5. `0xa4c138901f2c788c`: TS0601 air quality sensor
6. `0x588c81fffe37b37c`: R_sensor 

As the following image shows, all devices were placed on a desk in a office room where a person might occasionally be present next to the devices.

![Experimant pictures](./images/Experiment.jpg)

All devices were connected to a USB Zigbee coordinator dongle in the same room using [Zigbee2MQTT](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/) with a reporting of maximum 10min for each Q_sensor and R_sensor measurement on a installed mqtt server [`mosquitto`](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/guide/usage/integrations/home_assistant.html), max 1h for the LYWSD03MMC device and unknown for the TS0601 air quality sensor (but probably a few seconds as specified in the `Notes` of this [link](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/devices/TS0601_air_quality_sensor.html#tuya-ts0601_air_quality_sensor)).

In order to easily record measurements sent by different devices in a time series [influx2 database](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v2/), [Home-Assistant](http://home-assistant.io/) was configured to use the same mqtt server as Zigbee2MQTT and  Zigbee2MQTT was also configured [for Home-Assistant](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/guide/usage/integrations/home_assistant.html). In parallel, Home-Assistant was linked to [an external influx2 database](https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/influxdb/).

Finaly, to easily analyse the precision of the measurements in the influx2 database, a [grafana](https://grafana.com) dashboard using the influx2 database as source was created. 


## Results and discussion

### Temperature

During the campaign, the temperature variation in the room for all sensors (i.e. max temp minus min temp) was  6° (+/-1°). As shown in the figures below, all sensors give the same evolution of the room temperature during the experiment. However, the temperature values ​​are completely different and this difference will be analyzed further. 

![Q_sensor temperatures](./images/Q_sensor_Temperatures.png)

![All DS18B20 probes temperatures](./images/DS18B20%20probes.png)

![Other sensor temperature](./images/Other%20sensors%20Temperatures.png)

For the same temperature sensor, the range is around 1°C (75%) for the AHT20, the SDC40 and the DS18B20 and +/-1.75°C (75%) for the BMP280. Most temperature values ​​within the same sensor family are generally very close with the exception of the BMP280 as shown in the next figures. 

![AHT20 Temperature Range](./images/AHT20%20Temperature%20Range.png)

![SDC40 Temperature Range](./images/SDC40%20Temperature%20Range.png)

![BMP280 Temperature Range](./images/BMP280%20Temperature%20Range.png)

![DS18B20 Temperature Range](./images/DS18B20%20Temperature%20Range.png)

As shown in the next figure, the range of the 3 other temperature sensors is around 1.2°C (75%) which is in accordance with the accuracy of these devices. 

![Other sensors Temperature Range](./images/Other%20sensors%20Temperature%20Range.png)


**Since the temperature of other sensors are closed enough, the mean temperature of these sensors will be used as the real room temperature (ground truth).**

Additionally, in order to reduce the number of sensors to be analyzed, the average temperature of each sensor family will be used, even if, for the BMP280, it is less accurate. The following figures illustrate this analysis using average temperature values.

![Mean temperatures analysis](./images/Mean%20Temperatures.png)


**An important bias is present for all temperature sensors of the Q_sensor, more precisily, when you compare to other sensor, the AHT20 has a bias (mean/median value) of ~4°C, the SDC40 of ~4°C and the BMP280 of 9°C!**. 


The source of this biased temperature measurement might be:
- Bad sensor batch/uncalibrated sensors
- Overheating of the sensor when soldered on the PCB

Since the evolution of the temperature seems correct, a constant temperature offset can be removed for each sensor family. 


### Humidity 

The humidity variation in the room for all sensors was around 17%+/-2%. As before, a bias of ~8% (+/3%) of both humidity sensors in the Q_sensors compared to other sensor is present. 

Since the relative humidity depends on the room temperature, this bias is probably linked to the temperature one. 


### CO2




### Other measurements




## Conlusion
